Stars


What is a star?

A star is a huge sphere of very hot, glowing gas. Stars produce their own light 
and energy by a process called nuclear fusion. Fusion happens when lighter elements 
4are forced to become heavier elements. When this happens, a tremendous amount of
 energy is created causing the star to heat up and shine. Stars come in a variety 
of sizes and colors. Our Sun is an average sized yellowish star. Stars which are 
smaller than our Sun are reddish and larger stars are blue.


Main sequence stars

When a star begins to form, matter clumps together making it denser. At some point when
the temperature is over 8 million degrees celcius the kinetic energy of hydrogen gas at 
the core is so much that the the nuclie tend to fuse together to balance the gravitational
collapse of the star. 

Millions of years later, the star is stable enough because the outward radiation create
by the fusion of hydrogen into helium in  the will balance the gravitational forces
of the star trying to collapse in on itself. 


 
At this point it is called a main seqence star.


RED GIANT

A star in its last stages of life or stellar evolution is called a red giant. A high
frequency of the stars in the universe are main sequence stars, which means they convert
hydrogen to helium through nuclear fusion just like our sun. 

Due to the outward pressure from fusion against the inward pressure of gravity, the star
is balanced. But when the star runs out of hydrogen, this is when the star starts to
compress. The temperature increases with contraction and the helium starts to combine
with carbon. Based on the mass of the star, this helium might burn slowly or might go off
with an exposive bang. The amount of energy produced by the star through helium fusion
will cause the star to expand to a size much bigger than its original size. They can range 
from 100 million to a billion kilometers in diameter which is 100 to 1000 times bigger 
than our sun. But as they grow they become cooler because the energy consumed is more because
it spread across the entire surface area. The change in temperature makes them glow red and hence 
they were given the name red giant.


White dwarf

When a star runs out of hydrogen to fuse with helium, helium starts to fuse with carbon and the star
tends to contract or blow outward. If it collapses, a white dwarf is formed. The weight of this star
is about the mass of the sun but its radius is about that of the earth, which makes it really dense. 
The gravity would be about 350,000 times that of Earth. The reason for their density is because
their electrons are smashed together. These electrons have to squeeze together tightly 
to create an outward pressure. But sheding so much mass during its red giant phase,
no white dwarf can exceed 1.4 times the mass of the sun


Neutron stars

Neutron stars are about 1.4 times that of the sun. Born out of an exploding larger
star. When a star goes supernova, their outer layer blows off leaving behind a dense core that 
still continues to collapse. The gravity on these sort of stars is almost 2 billion times that
of the earth. A teaspoon would weight a billion tons. Neutron stars have an extremely quick rotation, spinning 
several times a second. They can spin at rates of 43,000 times per minute, slowing down over time.

Black hole
Black holes are some of the strangest and most fascinating objects found in outer 
space. They are objects of extreme density, with such strong gravitational attraction that even light 
cannot escape from their grasp if it comes near enough.

When a star burns through the last of its fuel, it could collapse. For smaller stars
, up to three times the sun's mass, the new core will be a neutron star or a white dwarf. But when a larger star collapses,
it continues to fall in on itself to create a stellar black hole.

Small black holes populate the universe, but their cousins, supermassive black
holes, dominate. Supermassive black holes are millions or even billions of times 
as massive as the sun, but have a radius similar to that of Earth's closest star.
 Such black holes are thought to lie at the center of pretty much every galaxy, 
including the Milky Way.

SUN

The sun was born about 4.6 billion years ago. Many scientists think the sun and 
the rest of the solar system formed from a giant, rotating cloud of gas and dust 
known as the solar nebula. As the nebula collapsed because of its gravity, 
it spun faster and flattened into a disk. Most of the material was pulled toward 
the center to form the sun.
The Sun is a normal-sequence star, one of more than a 100 billion stars in our galaxy. Its diameter is 1,390,000 km. Its mass is 
1.989e30 kg and its temperature is 5800 The Sun is by far the largest object in the solar system. 
It contains more than 99.8% of the total mass of the Solar System.The Sun is, at present, 
about 70% hydrogen and 28% helium by mass everything else ("metals") amounts to 
less than 2%. This changes slowly over time as the Sun converts hydrogen to
 helium in its core.



Conditions at the Sun's core (approximately the inner 25% of its radius) are 
extreme. The temperature is 15.6 million Kelvin and the pressure is 250 billion 
atmospheres. At the center of the core the Sun's density is more than 150 times 
that of water.

The Sun's power (about 386 billion billion mega Watts) is produced by nuclear 
fusion reactions. Each second about 700,000,000 tons of hydrogen are converted 
to about 695,000,000 tons of helium and 5,000,000 tons (=3.86e33 ergs) of energy 
in the form of gamma rays. As it travels out toward the surface, the energy is 
continuously absorbed and re-emitted at lower and lower temperatures so that by 
the time it reaches the surface, it is primarily visible light. For the last 20% 
of the way to the surface the energy is carried more by convection than by 
radiation.

The sun has enough nuclear fuel to stay much as it is now for another 5 
billion years. After that, it will swell to become a red giant. Eventually, 
it will shed its outer layers, and the remaining core will collapse to become 
a white dwarf. Slowly, this will fade, to enter its final phase as a dim, 
cool theoretical object sometimes known as a black dwarf.

There are eight planets and a large number of smaller objects orbiting the Sun. 
(Exactly which bodies should be classified as planets and which as 
"smaller objects" has been the source of some controversy, but in the end 
it is really only a matter of definition. Pluto is no longer officially a planet 
but we'll keep it here for history's sake.)


Mercury

Mercury is the closest planet to the sun, orbiting 57,910,000 km from the Sun. It diameter is 
4880 km and its mass is 3.30e23 kgs. 

History

In Roman mythology Mercury is the god of commerce, travel and thievery, the Roman 
counterpart of the Greek god Hermes, the messenger of the Gods. The planet probably 
received this name because it moves so quickly across the sky.


Mercury is the smallest planet in the solar system. Because the planet is so close to the sun, Mercury's surface temperature can reach 
a scorching 840 degrees Fahrenheit (450 degrees Celsius). However, since this world
doesn't have a real atmosphere to entrap any heat, at night temperatures can plummet
to minus 275 F (minus 170 C), a temperature swing of more than 1,100 
degrees F (600 degree C), the greatest in the solar system. 

Since it has no significant atmosphere to stop impacts, the planet is pockmarked with craters. About 4 billion years ago, an asteroid roughly 
60 miles (100 kilometers) wide struck Mercury with an impact equal to 1 trillion 
1-megaton bombs, creating a vast impact crater roughly 960 miles (1,550 km) wide.
Known as the Caloris Basin, this crater could hold the entire state of Texas. 
Another large impact may have helped create the planet’s odd spin. 

Mercury is the second densest planet after Earth, with a huge metallic core roughly 2,200 to 2,400 miles (3,600 to 3,800 km) wide, or about 75 percent of the planet's diameter. In comparison, Mercury's outer shell is only 300 to 400 miles (500 to 600 km) thick.

Mercury speeds around the sun every 88 Earth days, traveling through space at nearly 112,000 mph (180,000 kph), faster than any other planet. Its oval-shaped orbit is highly elliptical, taking Mercury as close as 29 million miles (47 million km) and as far as 43 million miles (70 million km) from the sun. If one could stand on Mercury when it is nearest to the sun, it would appear more than three times as large as it does when viewed from Earth.

Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): 

No atmosphere: Mercury possesses an exosphere containing 42 percent oxygen, 29 percent sodium, 22 percent hydrogen, 6 percent helium, 0.5 percent potassium, with possible trace amounts of argon, carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen, xenon, krypton and neon.

Magnetic field: Roughly 1 percent the strength of Earth's.

Internal structure: Iron core roughly 2,200 to 2,400 miles (3,600 to 3,800 km) wide. Outer silicate shell about 300 to 400 miles (500 to 600 km) thick. [Inside Planet Mercury (Infographic)]

Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 35,983,095 miles (57,909,175 km). By comparison: 0.38 Earth's distance from the Sun.

Perihelion (closest approach to sun): 28,580,000 miles (46,000,000 km). By comparison: 0.313 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest distance from sun): 43,380,000 miles (69,820,000 km). By comparison: 0.459 times that of Earth

Length of Day: 58.646 Earth-days

Even though the planet is the closest to the sun,
there has been evidence of water ice at the craters of the north pole.




Venus


Venus, the second planet from the sun, is named for the Roman goddess of love and beauty. The planet — the only planet named after a female — may have been named for the most beautiful deity of her pantheon because it shone the brightest of the five planets known to ancient astronomers.
In ancient times, Venus was often thought to be two different stars, the evening star and the morning star — that is, the ones that first appeared at sunset and sunrise. 


Venus and Earth are often called twins because they are similar in size, mass, density, composition and gravity. 
Venus is the hottest world in the solar system. Although Venus is not the planet closest to the sun, its dense atmosphere traps heat in a runaway version of the greenhouse effect that warms Earth. As a result, temperatures on Venus reach 870 degrees Fahrenheit (465 degrees Celsius), more than hot enough to melt lead.
The atmosphere of Venus is made up almost completely of carbon dioxide. Nitrogen exists in small doses, as do clouds of sulfuric acid. The air of Venus is so dense that the small traces of nitrogen are four times the amount found on Earth, although nitrogen makes up more than three-fourths of the terrestrial atmosphere. This composition causes a runaway greenhouse effect that heats the planet even hotter than the surface of Mercury, although Venus lies farther from the sun. When the rocky core of Venus formed, it captured much of the gas gravitationally.
Although Venus and Earth are similar in size, someone standing on the ground on Venus would experience air about 90 times heavier than Earth's atmosphere; pressures are similar to diving 3,000 feet beneath the ocean. Ironically, the most Earth-like atmosphere in the solar system occurs 30 to 40 miles (50 to 60 kilometers) above the surface of Venus. Both oxygen and hydrogen rise above the heavier gas layer covering the ground, and the pressures are similar to our planet.
The Venusian year — the time it takes to orbit the sun — is about 225 Earth days long. Normally, that would mean that days on Venus would be longer than years. However, because of Venus' curious retrograde rotation, the time from one sunrise to the next is only about 117 Earth days long. 
Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 67,237,910 miles (108,208,930 km). By comparison: 0.723 times that of Earth

Perihelion (closest approach to sun): 66,782,000 miles (107,476,000 km). By comparison: 0.730 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest distance from sun): 67,693,000 miles (108,942,000 km). By comparison: 0.716 times that of Earth


Earth
Earth, our home, is the third planet from the sun. It is the only planet known to have an atmosphere containing free oxygen, oceans of liquid water on its surface, and, of course, life.
Earth has a diameter of roughly 8,000 miles (13,000 kilometers), and is round because gravity pulls matter into a ball, although it is not perfectly round, instead being more of an "oblate spheroid" whose spin causes it to be squashed at its poles and swollen at the equator.

Roughly 71 percent of Earth's surface is covered by water, most of it in the oceans. 
Earth spins on an imaginary line called an axis that runs from the North Pole to the South Pole, while also orbiting the sun. It takes Earth 23.439 hours to complete a rotation on its axis, and roughly 365.26 days to complete an orbit around the sun.

Average distance from the sun: 92,956,050 miles (149,598,262 km)
Perihelion (closest approach to the sun): 91,402,640 miles (147,098,291 km)
Aphelion (farthest distance from the sun): 94,509,460 miles (152,098,233 km)
Length of solar day (single rotation on its axis): 23.934 hours
Length of year (single revolution around the sun): 365.26 days
Equatorial inclination to orbit: 23.4393 degrees

Earth was formed at roughly the same time as the sun and other planets some 4.6 billion years ago, when the solar system coalesced from a giant, rotating cloud of gas and dust known as the solar nebula. 

The image of Earth in space like a blue marble highlighted the planets fragility and the beauty of Earth. 
Pin It Credit: NASA
View full size image
Earth, our home, is the third planet from the sun. It is the only planet known to have an atmosphere containing free oxygen, oceans of liquid water on its surface, and, of course, life.

 Earth is the fifth largest of the planets in the solar system — smaller than the four gas giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranusand Neptune, but larger than the three other rocky planets, Mercury, Marsand Venus.

Earth has a diameter of roughly 8,000 miles (13,000 kilometers), and is round because gravity pulls matter into a ball, although it is not perfectly round, instead being more of an "oblate spheroid" whose spin causes it to be squashed at its poles and swollen at the equator.

Roughly 71 percent of Earth's surface is covered by water, most of it in the oceans. About a fifth of Earth's atmosphereis made up of oxygen, produced by plants. While scientists have been studying our planet for centuries, much has been learned in recent decades by studying pictures of Earth from space.

Orbital characteristics

Earth spins on an imaginary line called an axis that runs from the North Pole to the South Pole, while also orbiting the sun. It takes Earth 23.439 hours to complete a rotation on its axis, and roughly 365.26 days to complete an orbit around the sun.

Earth's axis of rotation is tilted in relation to the ecliptic plane, an imaginary surface through Earth's orbit around the sun. This means the northern and southern hemispheres will sometimes point toward or away from the sun depending on the time of year, varying the amount of light they receive and causing the seasons.

Earth's orbit is not a perfect circle, but is rather an oval-shaped ellipse, like that of the orbits of all the other planets. Earth is a bit closer to the sun in early January and farther away in July, although this variation has a much smaller effect than the heating and cooling caused by the tilt of Earth's axis. Earth happens to lie within the so-called "Goldilocks zone" around its star, where temperatures are just right to maintain liquid water on its surface.

Orbit & rotation

Some statistics about Earth, according to NASA:

Average distance from the sun: 92,956,050 miles (149,598,262 km)
Perihelion (closest approach to the sun): 91,402,640 miles (147,098,291 km)
Aphelion (farthest distance from the sun): 94,509,460 miles (152,098,233 km)
Length of solar day (single rotation on its axis): 23.934 hours
Length of year (single revolution around the sun): 365.26 days
Equatorial inclination to orbit: 23.4393 degrees
Earth's formation and evolution

Scientists think Earth was formed at roughly the same time as the sun and other planets some 4.6 billion years ago, when the solar system coalesced from a giant, rotating cloud of gas and dust known as the solar nebula. As the nebula collapsed because of its gravity, it spun faster and flattened into a disk. Most of the material was pulled toward the center to form the sun.

Other particles within the disk collided and stuck together to form ever-larger bodies, including Earth. The solar wind from the sun was so powerful that it swept away most of the lighter elements, such as hydrogen and helium, from the innermost worlds, rendering Earth and its siblings into small, rocky planets.

Scientists think Earth started off as a waterless mass of rock. Radioactive materials in the rock and increasing pressure deep within the Earth generated enough heat to melt Earth's interior, causing some chemicals to rise to the surface and form water, while others became the gases of the atmosphere. Recent evidence suggests that Earth's crust and oceans may have formed within about 200 million years after the planet had taken shape.

The history of Earth is divided into four eons — starting with the earliest, these are the Hadean, Archean, Proterozoic and Phanerozoic. The first three eons, which together lasted nearly 4 billion years, are together known as the Precambrian. Evidence for life has been found in the Archaean about 3.8 billion years ago, but life did not become abundant until the Phanerozoic.

The Phanerozoic is divided into three eras — starting with the earliest, these are the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic. The Paleozoic Era saw the development of many kinds of animals and plants in the seas and on land, the Mesozoic Era was the age of dinosaurs, and the Cenozoic Era we are in currently is the age of mammals.

Most of the fossils seen in Paleozoic rocks are invertebrate animals lacking backbones, such as corals, mollusks and trilobites. Fish are first found about 450 million years ago, while amphibians appear roughly 380 million years ago. By 300 million years ago, large forests and swamps covered the land, and the earliest fossils of reptiles appear during this period as well.

The Mesozoic saw the ascendence of dinosaurs, although mammals also appear in the fossil record about 200 million years ago. During this time, flowering plants became the dominant plant group and continue to be so today.

The Cenozoic began about 65 million years ago with the end of the age of dinosaurs, which many scientists think was caused by a cosmic impact. Mammals survived to become the dominant land animals of today.


Composition & structure

Atmosphere

Earth's atmosphere is roughly 78 percent nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen, with trace amounts of water, argon, carbon dioxide and other gases. Nowhere else in the solar system can one find an atmosphere loaded with free oxygen, which ultimately proved vital to one of the other unique features of Earth — us.

Air surrounds Earth and becomes thinner farther from the surface. Roughly 100 miles (160 km) above Earth, the air is so thin that satellites can zip through with little resistance. Still, traces of atmosphere can be found as high as 370 miles (600 km) above the surface.

The lowest layer of the atmosphere is known as the troposphere, which is constantly in motion, causing the weather. Sunlight heats the planet's surface, causing warm air to rise. This air ultimately expands and cools as air pressure decreases, and because this cool air is denser than its surroundings, it then sinks, only to get warmed by the Earth once again.
Oxygen is the most abundant element in rocks in Earth's crust, composing roughly 47 percent of the weight of all rock. The second most abundant element is silicon at 27 percent, followed by aluminum at 8 percent, iron at 5 percent, calcium at 4 percent, and sodium, potassium, and magnesium at about 2 percent each.

Earth's core consists mostly of iron and nickel and potentially smaller amounts of lighter elements such as sulfur and oxygen. The mantle is made of iron and magnesium-rich silicate rocks. (The combination of silicon and oxygen is known as silica, and minerals that contain silica are known as silicate minerals.)
Moon
Earth's moon is 2,159 miles (3,474 km) wide, about one-fourth of Earth's diameter. Earth has one moon, while Mercury and Venus have none and all the other planets in our solar system have two or more.

The leading explanation for how the moon formed was that a giant impact knocked off the raw ingredients for the moon off the primitive molten Earth and into orbit. Scientists have suggested the impactor was roughly 10 percent the mass of Earth, about the size of Mars.



Mars
Mars is the fourth planet from the sun. Befitting the red planet's bloody color, the Romans named it after their god of war. 
Climate
Mars is much colder than Earth, in large part due to its greater distance from the sun. The average temperature is about minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 60 degrees Celsius), although they can vary from minus 195 F (minus 125 C) near the poles during the winter to as much as 70 F (20 C) at midday near the equator.
Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): 

95.32 percent carbon dioxide, 2.7 percent nitrogen, 1.6 percent argon, 0.13 percent oxygen, 0.08 percent carbon monoxide, minor amounts of water, nitrogen oxide, neon, hydrogen-deuterium-oxygen, krypton, xenon


The carbon-dioxide-rich atmosphere of Mars is also roughly 100 times less dense than Earth's on average, but it is nevertheless thick enough to support weather, clouds and winds. The density of the atmosphere varies seasonally, as winter forces carbon dioxide to freeze out of the Martian air.
Astroid Belt

Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 141,633,260 miles (227,936,640 km). By comparison: 1.524 times that of Earth

Perihelion (closest): 128,400,000 miles (206,600,000 km). By comparison: 1.404 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest): 154,900,000 miles (249,200,000 km). By comparison: 1.638 times that of Earth

Jupiter
Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system. Fittingly, it was named after the king of the gods in Roman mythology.

458
Submit
502
Reddit
 
This photo of Jupiter was taken on  Sept. 20, 2010 when Jupiter made its closest approach to Earth since 1963. (Uranus [insert] was visible through telescopes near Jupiter.)
Pin It This photo of Jupiter was taken on Sept. 20, 2010 when Jupiter made its closest approach to Earth since 1963. (Uranus [insert] was visible through telescopes near Jupiter.)
Credit: Jimmy Eubanks
View full size image
Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system. Fittingly, it was named after the king of the gods in Roman mythology. In a similar manner, the ancient Greeks named the planet after Zeus, the king of the Greek pantheon.

Jupiter helped revolutionize the way we saw the universe and ourselves in 1610, when Galileo discovered Jupiter's four large moons — Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto, now known as the Galilean moons. This was the first time celestial bodies were seen circling an object other than Earth, major support of the Copernican view that Earth was not the center of the universe.

Physical characteristics

Jupiter is the most massive planet in our solar system, more than twice as massive as all the other planets combined, and had it been about 80 times more massive, it would have actually become a star instead of a planet. Its atmosphere resembles that of the sun, made up mostly of hydrogen and helium, and with four large moons and many smaller moons in orbit around it, Jupiter by itself forms a kind of miniature solar system
The most extraordinary feature on Jupiter is undoubtedly the Great Red Spot, a giant hurricane-like storm seen for more than 300 years. At its widest, the Great Red Spot is three times the diameter of the Earth, and its edge spins counterclockwise around its center at a speed of about 225 mph (360 kph). The color of the storm, which usually varies from brick red to slightly brown, may come from small amounts of sulfur and phosphorus in the ammonia crystals in Jupiter's clouds.

458
Submit
502
Reddit
 
This photo of Jupiter was taken on  Sept. 20, 2010 when Jupiter made its closest approach to Earth since 1963. (Uranus [insert] was visible through telescopes near Jupiter.)
Pin It This photo of Jupiter was taken on Sept. 20, 2010 when Jupiter made its closest approach to Earth since 1963. (Uranus [insert] was visible through telescopes near Jupiter.)
Credit: Jimmy Eubanks
View full size image
Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system. Fittingly, it was named after the king of the gods in Roman mythology. In a similar manner, the ancient Greeks named the planet after Zeus, the king of the Greek pantheon.

Jupiter helped revolutionize the way we saw the universe and ourselves in 1610, when Galileo discovered Jupiter's four large moons — Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto, now known as the Galilean moons. This was the first time celestial bodies were seen circling an object other than Earth, major support of the Copernican view that Earth was not the center of the universe.

Physical characteristics

Jupiter is the most massive planet in our solar system, more than twice as massive as all the other planets combined, and had it been about 80 times more massive, it would have actually become a star instead of a planet. Its atmosphere resembles that of the sun, made up mostly of hydrogen and helium, and with four large moons and many smaller moons in orbit around it, Jupiter by itself forms a kind of miniature solar system. All told, the immense volume of Jupiter could hold more than 1,300 Earths.

The colorful bands of Jupiter are arranged in dark belts and light zones created by strong east-west winds in the planet's upper atmosphere traveling more than 400 mph (640 kph). The white clouds in the zones are made of crystals of frozen ammonia, while darker clouds of other chemicals are found in the belts. At the deepest visible levels are blue clouds. Far from being static, the stripes of clouds change over time. Inside the atmosphere, diamond rain may fill the skies.

The most extraordinary feature on Jupiter is undoubtedly the Great Red Spot, a giant hurricane-like storm seen for more than 300 years. At its widest, the Great Red Spot is three times the diameter of the Earth, and its edge spins counterclockwise around its center at a speed of about 225 mph (360 kph). The color of the storm, which usually varies from brick red to slightly brown, may come from small amounts of sulfur and phosphorus in the ammonia crystals in Jupiter's clouds. The spot grows and shrinks over time, and every now and again, seems to fade entirely.

Jupiter's gargantuan magnetic field is the strongest of all the planets in the solar system at nearly 20,000 times the strength of Earth's. It traps electrically charged particles in an intense belt of electrons and other electrically charged particles that regularly blasts the planet's moons and rings with a level of radiation more than 1,000 times the lethal level for a human, damaging even heavily shielded spacecraft such as NASA's Galileo probe. The magnetosphere of Jupiter, which is composed of these fields and particles, swells out some 600,000 to 2 million miles (1 million to 3 million km) toward the sun and tapers to a tail extending more than 600 million miles (1 billion km) behind Jupiter.

Jupiter spins faster than any other planet, taking a little under 10 hours to complete a turn on its axis, compared with 24 hours for Earth. This rapid spin makes Jupiter bulge at the equator and flatten at the poles, making the planet about 7 percent wider at the equator than at the poles.

Jupiter broadcasts radio waves strong enough to detect on Earth. These come in two forms — strong bursts that occur when Io, the closest of Jupiter's large moons, passes through certain regions of Jupiter's magnetic field, and continuous radiation from Jupiter's surface and high-energy particles in its radiation belts. These radio waves could help scientists to probe the oceans on its moons.

Jupiter is the largest planet in Earth’s solar system and has 63 moons encircling it. The planet is a giant ball of gas and liquid.Pin It Credit: Karl Tate, SPACE.comView full size image
 

Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): 89.8 percent molecular hydrogen, 10.2 percent helium, minor amounts of methane, ammonia, hydrogen deuteride, ethane, water, ammonia ice aerosols, water ice aerosols, ammonia hydrosulfide aerosols

Magnetic field: Nearly 20,000 times stronger than Earth's

Chemical composition: Jupiter has a dense core of uncertain composition, surrounded by a helium-rich layer of fluid metallic hydrogen, wrapped up in an atmosphere primarily made of molecular hydrogen.

Internal structure: A core less than 10 times Earth's mass surrounded by a layer of fluid metallic hydrogen extending out to 80 to 90 percent of the diameter of the planet, enclosed in an atmosphere mostly made of gaseous and liquid hydrogen.

Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 483,682,810 miles (778,412,020 km). By comparison: 5.203 times that of Earth

Perihelion (closest approach to the sun): 460,276,100 miles (740,742,600 km). By comparison, 5.036 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest distance from the sun): 507,089,500 miles (816,081,400 km). By comparison: 5.366 times that of Earth


Saturn
Saturn is the sixth planet from the sun and the second largest planet in the solar system. Saturn was the Roman name for Cronus, the lord of the Titans in Greek mythology. 
Saturn is a gas giant made up mostly of hydrogen and helium. Saturn is bigenough to hold more than 760 Earths, and is more massive than any other planet except Jupiter, roughly 95 times Earth's mass. However, Saturn has the lowest density of all the planets, and is the only one less dense than water — if there were a bathtub big enough to hold it, Saturn would float.

The yellow and gold bands seen in Saturn's atmosphere are the result of super-fast winds in the upper atmosphere, which can reach up to 1,100 mph (1,800 km/h) around its equator, combined with heat rising from the planet's interior.
Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): 96.3 percent molecular hydrogen, 3.25 percent helium, minor amounts of methane, ammonia, hydrogen deuteride, ethane, ammonia ice aerosols, water ice aerosols, ammonia hydrosulfide aerosols

Magnetic field: Saturn has a magnetic field about 578 times more powerful than Earth's.

Chemical composition: Saturn seems to have a hot solid inner core of iron and rocky material surrounded by an outer core probably composed of ammonia, methane, and water. Next is a layer of highly compressed, liquid metallic hydrogen, followed by a region of viscous hydrogen and helium. This hydrogen and helium becomes gaseous near the planet's surface and merges with its atmosphere.

Internal structure: Saturn seems to have a core between about 10 to 20 times as massive as Earth.

Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 885,904,700 miles (1,426,725,400 km). By comparison: 9.53707 times that of Earth.

Perihelion (closest approach to sun): 838,519,000 miles (1,349,467,000 km). By comparison: 9.177 times that of Earth.

Aphelion (farthest distance from sun): 934,530,000 miles (1,503,983,000 km). By comparison: 9.886 times that of Earth.

The rings are generally named alphabetically in the order they were discovered. They are usually relatively close to each other, with one key exception caused by the Cassini Division, a gap some 2,920 miles (4,700 km) wide. The main rings, working out from the planet, are known as C, B and A, with the Cassini Division separating B and A. The innermost is the extremely faint D ring, while the outermost to date, revealed in 2009, could fit a billion Earths within it.

Uranus
Uranus is the seventh planet from the sun and the first to be discovered by scientists. Although Uranus is visible to the naked eye, it was long mistaken as a star because of the planet’s dimness and slow orbit. The planet is also notable for its dramatic tilt, which causes its axis to point nearly directly at the sun.


Uranusis blue-green in color, the result of methane in its mostly hydrogen-helium atmosphere. The planet is often dubbed an ice giant, since 80 percent or more of its mass is made up of a fluid mix of water, methane, and ammonia ices.

Unlike the other planets of the solar system, Uranus is tilted so far that it essentially orbits the sun on its side, with the axis of its spin nearly pointing at the star. This unusual orientation might be due to a collision with a planet-size body, or several small bodies, soon after it was formed.
Orbital characteristics

Average distance from the sun: 1,783,939,400 miles (2,870,972,200 kilometers). By comparison: 19.191 times that of Earth

Perihelion (closest approach to the sun): 1,699,800,000 miles (2,735,560,000 km). By comparison: 18.60 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest distance from sun): 1,868,080,000 miles (3,006,390,000 km). By comparison: 19.76 times that of Earth


Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): 82.5 percent hydrogen, 15.2 percent helium, 2.3 percent methane

Magnetic field: Magnetic pole tilt compared to rotational axis: 58.6 degrees

Composition: The overall composition of Uranus is, by mass, thought to be about 25 percent rock, 60 to 70 percent ice, and 5 to 15 percent hydrogen and helium.

Internal structure: Mantle of water, ammonia and methane ices; core of iron and magnesium-silicate

Orbit & rotation

Axial tilt: 97.77 degrees, compared to Earth's 23.5 degrees

Seasonal cycle & length: Approximately 21 years per season

Orbital period: Approximately 84 Earth years

Uranus' climate

The extreme axial tilt Uranus experiences can give rise to unusual weather. As sunlight reaches some areas for the first time in years, it heats up the atmosphere, triggering gigantic springtime storms roughly the size of North America, according to NASA.

Neptune
Neptune is the eighth planet from the sun. It was the first planet to get its existence predicted by mathematical calculations before it was actually seen through a telescope on Sept. 23, 1846. Irregularities in the orbit of Uranus led French astronomer Alexis Bouvard to suggest that the gravitational pull from another celestial body might be responsible. German astronomer Johann Galle then relied on subsequent calculations to help spot Neptune via telescope.
Neptune's cloud cover has an especially vivid blue tint that is partly due to an as-yet-unidentified compound and the result of the absorption of red light by methane in the planets mostly hydrogen-helium atmosphere.
Despite its great distance from the sun, which means it gets little sunlight to help warm and drive its atmosphere, Neptune's winds can reach up to 1,500 mph (2,400 kph), the fastest detected yet in the solar system.
Composition & structure

Atmospheric composition (by volume): hydrogen, 80 percent; helium, 19.0 percent; methane, 1.5 percent

Magnetic field: Roughly 27 times more powerful than Earth's

Composition: The overall composition of Neptune is, by mass, thought to be about 25 percent rock, 60 to 70 percent ice, and 5 to 15 percent hydrogen and helium, according to Tristan Guillot, author of "Interiors of Giant Planets Inside and Outside the Solar System" in the journal Science.

Internal structure: Mantle of water, ammonia and methane ices; Core of iron and magnesium-silicate

Orbit & rotation

Average distance from the sun: 2,795,084,800 miles (4,498,252,900 km). By comparison: 30.069 times farther than Earth

Perihelion (closest approach to the sun): 2,771,087,000 miles (4,459,630,000 km). By comparison: 29.820 times that of Earth

Aphelion (farthest distance from the sun): 2,819,080,000 miles (4,536,870,000 km). By comparison: 30.326 times that of Earth

Neptune has 14 known moons, named after lesser sea gods and nymphs from Greek mythology. The largest by far is Triton, whose discovery on Oct. 10, 1846, was in a sense enabled by beer — amateur astronomer William Lassell used the fortune he made as a brewer to finance his telescopes.

pluto


Asteroid Belt
Majority of the asteroids in the solar system are found in a region of the solar system
beyond mars. They form the Asteroid Belt. Others orbit in near-Earth space and a few migrate or are thrown out to the outer solar system by gravitational interactions. The four largest asteroids in the belt are Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea. They contain half the mass of the entire belt. The rest of the mass is contained in countless smaller bodies. There was a theory once that if you combined all the asteroids they would make up the missing “Fifth” rocky planet. Planetary scientists estimate that if you could put all that material together that exists there today, it would make a tiny world smaller than Earth’s moon.

ASTEROID BELT FACTS
The Asteroid Belt
Asteroid Belt Illustration – laurinemoreau.com
What Is The Asteroid Belt?
The vast majority of asteroids in the solar system are found in a region of the solar system out beyond Mars. They form the Asteroid Belt. Others orbit in near-Earth space and a few migrate or are thrown out to the outer solar system by gravitational interactions. The four largest asteroids in the belt are Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea. They contain half the mass of the entire belt. The rest of the mass is contained in countless smaller bodies. There was a theory once that if you combined all the asteroids they would make up the missing “Fifth” rocky planet. Planetary scientists estimate that if you could put all that material together that exists there today, it would make a tiny world smaller than Earth’s moon.

Where Is The Asteroid Belt Located?
The Asteroid Belt is located in an area of space between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. That places it between 2.2 and 3.2 astronomical units (AU) from the Sun. The belt is about 1 AU thick. The average distance between objects in the Asteroid Belt is quite large. If you could stand on an asteroid and look around, the next one would be too far away to see very well.




kuiper belt
Beyond the gas giant Neptune lies a region of space filled with icy bodies. Known as the Kuiper Belt, this chilly expanse holds trillions of objects, remnants of the early solar system.
The Kuiper belt is an elliptical plane in space spanning from 30 to 50 times Earth's distance from the sun, or 2.5 to 4.5 billion miles (4.5 to 7.4 billion kilometers). The belt is similar to the asteroid belt found between Mars and Jupiter, although the objects in the Kuiper Belt tend more to be icy rather than rocky.






goal for now
- add copyright
- put files in winscp
- link all pages with one another
- resize images






